# Optimal model search strategies

Four model search strategies are implemented combining
[`SEMdag()`](https://grassiMario.github.io/SEMgraph/reference/SEMdag.md),
[`SEMbap()`](https://grassiMario.github.io/SEMgraph/reference/SEMbap.md),
and
[`resizeGraph()`](https://grassiMario.github.io/SEMgraph/reference/resizeGraph.md)
functions. All strategies estimate a new graph by 1) adjusting (BAP
deconfounding) the the data matrix and 2) re-sizing the output DAG.

## Usage

``` r
modelSearch(
  graph,
  data,
  gnet = NULL,
  d = 2,
  search = "basic",
  beta = 0,
  method = "BH",
  alpha = 0.05,
  verbose = FALSE,
  ...
)
```

## Arguments

- graph:

  Input graph as an igraph object.

- data:

  A matrix or data.frame. Rows correspond to subjects, and columns to
  graph nodes (variables).

- gnet:

  Reference directed network used to validate and import nodes and
  interactions.

- d:

  Maximum allowed geodesic distance for directed or undirected shortest
  path search. A distance `d = 0` disables shortest path search (fixed
  in `search = "basic"`), while `d = 1` (fixed in `search = "direct"`)
  only search for directed links (i.e., no mediators are allowed). A
  distance `d` \> 1 (defaults to `d = 2` for "outer" and "inner"
  strategies), will search for shortest paths with at most `d` - 1
  mediators between nodes sharing a significant estimated interaction.
  Connectors are imported from the reference interactome, as specified
  by the argument `gnet`. If the edges of the reference interactome are
  weighted by P-value, as defined by the `E(gnet)$pv` attribute, the
  shortest path with the smallest sum of weights will be chosen (e.g.,
  see
  [`weightGraph`](https://grassiMario.github.io/SEMgraph/reference/weightGraph.md)
  for graph weighting options).

- search:

  Search strategy. Four model search strategies are available:

  - "outer". The estimated DAG is re-sized using
    [`resizeGraph`](https://grassiMario.github.io/SEMgraph/reference/resizeGraph.md)
    to find new indirect paths (i.e., inferred directed connections that
    may hide new mediators). New interactions and connectors will be
    searched and imported from the reference network (argument `gnet`,
    see above). Both DAG and extended graph complexity can be controlled
    with `beta` \> 0 and `d` \> 1 arguments, respectively. The term
    "outer" means that new model mediator variables are imported from an
    external resource (i.e., the reference network).

  - "inner". This strategy is analogous to the "outer" one, but disables
    external mediator search. In other words, new indirect paths are
    generated by adding new interactions of the input model, so that
    mediators will be nodes already present in the input graph. The
    reference network is still used to validate new model paths. Also in
    this case, `beta` \> 0 and `d` \> 1 are used.

  - "direct". The input graph structure is improved through direct
    (i.e., adjacent) link search, followed by interaction validation and
    import from the reference network, with no mediators (i.e.,
    `d = 1`).

  - "basic" (default). While the previous strategies rely on the input
    graph and the reference network to integrate knowledge to the final
    model, the "basic" strategy is data-driven. The input graph is
    needed to define the topological order. The argument `gnet` is set
    to NULL (i.e., no reference network is needed) and argument `d = 0`.
    Model complexity can be still controlled by setting `beta` \> 0.

- beta:

  Numeric value. Minimum absolute LASSO beta coefficient for a new
  interaction to be retained in the estimated DAG backbone. Lower `beta`
  values correspond to more complex DAGs. By default, `beta` is set to 0
  (i.e., maximum complexity).

- method:

  Multiple testing correction method. One of the values available in
  [`p.adjust`](https://rdrr.io/r/stats/p.adjust.html). By default,
  `method` is set to "BH" (i.e., Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test
  correction).

- alpha:

  Significance level for false discovery rate (FDR) used for local
  d-separation tests. This argument is used to control data
  de-correlation. A higher `alpha` level includes more hidden
  covariances, thus considering more sources of confounding. If
  `alpha = 0`, data de-correlation is disabled. By default,
  `alpha = 0.05`.

- verbose:

  If TRUE, it shows intermediate graphs during the execution (not
  recommended for large graphs).

- ...:

  Currently ignored.

## Value

The output model as well as the adjusted dataset are returned as a list
of 2 objects:

- "graph", the output model as an igraph object;

- "data", the adjusted dataset.

## Details

Search strategies can be ordered by decreasing conservativeness respect
to the input graph, as: "direct", "inner", "outer", and "basic". The
first three strategies are knowledge-based, since they require an input
graph and a reference network, together with data, for
knowledge-assisted model improvement. The last one does not require any
reference and the output model structure will be data-driven. Output
model complexity can be limited using arguments `d` and `beta`. While d
is fixed to 0 or 1 in "basic" or "direct", respectively; we suggest
starting with `d = 2` (only one mediator) for the other two strategies.
For knowledge-based strategies, we suggest to to start with `beta = 0`.
Then, beta can be relaxed (0 to \< 0.1) to improve model fitting, if
needed. Since data-driven models can be complex, we suggest to start
from `beta = 0` when using the "basic" strategy. The `beta` value can be
relaxed until a good model fit is obtained. Argument alpha determines
the extent of data adjustment: lower alpha values for FDR correction
correspond to a smaller number of significant confounding factors, hence
a weaker correction (default `alpha = 0.05`).

## Author

Mario Grassi <mario.grassi@unipv.it>

## Examples

``` r
# \donttest{
# Comparison among different model estimation strategies

# Nonparanormal(npn) transformation
als.npn <- transformData(alsData$exprs)$data
#> Conducting the nonparanormal transformation via shrunkun ECDF...done.
# Reference network (KEGG interactome)
gnet <- kegg

# Models estimation
m1 <- modelSearch(graph = alsData$graph, data = als.npn, gnet = gnet,
      search = "direct", beta = 0, alpha = 0.05)
#> Step1: BAP deconfounding...
#> Step2: DAG estimation...
#> Step3: DAG resize (remove edges/add nodes)...
#> 
#> Done.
m2 <- modelSearch(graph = alsData$graph, data = als.npn, gnet = gnet,
      d = 2, search = "inner", beta = 0, alpha = 0.05)
#> Step1: BAP deconfounding...
#> Step2: DAG estimation...
#> Step3: DAG resize (remove edges/add nodes)...
#> 
#> Done.
m3 <- modelSearch(graph = alsData$graph, data = als.npn, gnet = gnet,
      d = 2, search = "outer", beta = 0, alpha = 0.05)
#> Step1: BAP deconfounding...
#> Step2: DAG estimation...
#> Step3: DAG resize (remove edges/add nodes)...
#> 
#> Done.
m4 <- modelSearch(graph = alsData$graph, data = als.npn, gnet = NULL,
      search = "basic", beta = 0.1, alpha = 0.05)
#> Step1: BAP deconfounding...
#> Step2: DAG estimation...
#> Step3: DAG resize (remove edges/add nodes)...
#> 
#> None DAG resize for basic search ! 
#> 
#> Done.

# Graphs
#old.par <- par(no.readonly = TRUE)
#par(mfrow=c(2,2), mar= rep(1,4))
gplot(m1$graph, main = "direct graph")

gplot(m2$graph, main = "inner graph")

gplot(m3$graph, main = "outer graph")

gplot(m4$graph, main = "basic graph")

#par(old.par)
# }
```
